numpy_basics/index.md, before:

---
title: NumPy Basics
---
# NumPy Basics

## Why Lists Aren't Enough

You've been using Python lists to store data, and they work great for small collections. But imagine you're running Euler's method with 10,000 timesteps, or processing sensor data with 1 million readings.

Try this with lists:

```python
# Slow: looping through lists
velocities = [0.0] * 10000
for i in range(1, 10000):
    velocities[i] = velocities[i-1] + 0.1
```

This works, but it's slow. NumPy does the same thing *much* faster:

```python
import numpy as np

# Fast: NumPy array operations
velocities = np.zeros(10000)
# Vectorized operations work on entire arrays at once
```

NumPy arrays are designed for numerical computing. They're faster, use less memory, and support mathematical operations that work on entire arrays at once.

:::{note}
If you're solving ODEs, processing experimental data, or doing any serious numerical work, you'll use NumPy. It's the foundation of scientific Python.
:::

## Topics
- [Creating Arrays](creating_arrays.md): Making arrays from lists, generating sequences
- [Array Operations](operations.md): Math on entire arrays at once

Commit message:

Add NumPy useful functions page, enhance NumPy tutorials

numpy_basics/index.md, after:

---
title: NumPy Basics
---
# NumPy Basics

## Why Do I Need This?

You've been using Python lists, and they work fine for small things. But try running Euler's method with 10,000 timesteps:

```python
# With lists: slow and painful
velocities = [0.0] * 10000
for i in range(1, 10000):
    velocities[i] = velocities[i-1] + 0.1 * some_formula
```

Now imagine doing this for a 2D grid with 1 million points. Lists will take forever.

**NumPy arrays are built for this.** They're:
- 10-100x faster than lists for numerical operations
- Designed for mathematical formulas (no loops needed!)
- The foundation of all scientific Python

If you're solving differential equations, processing data, or doing any serious computation, you'll use NumPy. It's not optional.

---

## What You'll Learn

### [Creating Arrays](creating_arrays.md)
How to make arrays of zeros, evenly-spaced grids, and 2D matrices. These are the building blocks for every numerical method.

### [Array Operations](operations.md)
The superpower: doing math on entire arrays at once. Write formulas that apply to thousands of values without a single loop.

### [Useful Functions](useful_functions.md)
A reference for common tasks: checking array shape, reshaping, random numbers, sorting, searching, and more.
